City Council

REGULAR MEETING MINUTES
Date: 5/12/2026
Time: 6:00 p.m.

A. Call To Order
Mayor Nash called the meeting to order at 6:04 p.m.

B. Roll Call
Present: Combs, Nash, Schmidt, Taylor, Wise

E. Presentations and Proclamations
E1. Presentation: Youth Poetry Voices celebration

The youth poets presented their poems.

E2. Presentation: Youth Advisory Committee

The Youth Advisory Committee made the presentation.

E3. Proclamation: Mental Health Month

Mayor Nash introduced the proclamation.

E4. Proclamation: Affordable Housing Month

Mayor Nash introduced the proclamation. Housing Manager Tim Wong accepted the proclamation.

F. Consent Calendar
F1. Accept the City Council meeting minutes for April 14, 2026

F2. Consider and adopt a resolution renewing Chapter 2.70 of the Menlo Park Municipal Code entitled military equipment use ordinance

F3. Receive and file the investment portfolio quarterly reports for Dec. 31, 2025

F4. Consider and adopt a resolution approving the preliminary engineer's report for the Menlo Park Landscaping Assessment District and adopt a resolution intending to order the levy and collection of assessments for fiscal year 2026-27

F5. Authorize the city manager to execute an amendment to the Animal Control agreement with the County of San Mateo for a three-year term beginning July 1, 2026

ACTION: Motion and second (Taylor/Wise), to approve the consent calendar, passed unanimously.

G. Study Session
G1. Provide direction on public safety priority for fiscal year 2026-27

The City Council directed staff to assess staffing and deployment, strengthen recruitment and field training, sustain data-driven crime prevention, and continue targeted technology investments and accountability measures.

G2. Provide direction on the five-year capital improvement plan

The City Council directed staff to explore quiet-zone funding, fund $3.8 million in General Capital Fund needs, fund $0.83 million in Transportation Impact Fee needs, delay two projects, cancel the Sand Hill Tunnel Rehabilitation Project, reduce budgets by $1.5 million, and add the Sharon Park Pond Pump Station Replacement to the capital plan.

H. Public Hearing
H1. Conduct a public hearing and consider a resolution approving maximum increases in rates for waste, recycling, and compost collection

Mayor Nash opened and closed the public hearing.

ACTION: By acclamation, this item was continued to June 9, 2026, at 6 p.m.

H2. Conduct a public hearing and consider a resolution approving maximum rate increases for Menlo Park Municipal Water and setting water capacity charges

Mayor Nash opened and closed the public hearing.

ACTION: By acclamation, this item was continued to June 9, 2026, at 6 p.m.

H3. Introduce and waive the reading of an ordinance amending the Menlo Park Zoning Map to temporarily exclude eligible sites near the Menlo Park Caltrain Station from Senate Bill 79

The City Council directed staff to keep City Council advised of applications submitted pursuant to SB 79.

No action.

I. Informational Items
I1. City Council agenda topics: May-June 2026

L. Adjournment
Mayor Nash adjourned the meeting at 10:40 p.m.

These minutes were approved at the City Council meeting June 9, 2026.
