City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
Housing Commission



REGULAR MEETING AGENDA
Date: 10/7/2026
Time: 6:30 p.m.
Locations:

Zoom.us/join – 865 4847 4804 and
Arrillaga Recreation Center, Oak Room
700 Alma St., Menlo Park, CA 94025

Members of the public can listen to the meeting and participate using the following methods.
How to participate in the meeting
• Access the meeting, in-person, at Arrillaga Recreation Center, Oak Room
• Access the meeting real-time online at:
Zoom.us/join – Meeting ID 865 4847 4804
• Access the meeting real-time via telephone at:
(669) 900-6833
Meeting ID 865 4847 4804
Press *9 to raise hand to speak

Subject to Change: The format of this meeting may be altered or the meeting may be cancelled. You may
check on the status of the meeting by visiting the city website www.menlopark.gov. The instructions for
logging on to the webinar and/or the access code is subject to change. If you have difficulty accessing the
webinar, please check the latest online edition of the posted agenda for updated information
(www.menlopark.gov/agendas).

Regular Session

A. Call To Order
B. Roll Call
C. Public Comment
Under “Public Comment,” the public may address the Commission on any subject not listed on the
agenda. Each speaker may address the Commission once under Public Comment for a limit of
three minutes. The Commission cannot act on items not listed on the agenda and, therefore, the
Commission cannot respond to non-agenda issues brought up under Public Comment other than
to provide general information.
D. Regular Business
D1. Approve the Housing Commission meeting minutes for September 2 , 2026 (Attachment)

D2. Review and make a recommendation to the City Council on establishing proposed rental
assistance and legal assistance programs ( Staff Report #26-011-HC)

D3. Review and provide feedback on the draft 2026-2027 Below Market Rate Housing Fund Notice of
Funding Availability (
S
taff Report #26-0 12-HC)






City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
Housing Commission Regular Meeting Agenda
October 7, 2026
Page 2

E. Reports and Announcements
E1. Commissioner updates

E2. Subcommittee updates

E3. Future agenda items

E4. Staff updates and announcements

E5. Receive and file the 2026-2027 Housing Commission work plan (Attachment)

F. Adjournment
At every Regular Meeting of the Commission, in addition to the Public Comment period where the public shall have the
right to address the Commission on any matters of public interest not listed on the agenda, members of the public have
the right to directly address the Commission on any item listed on the agenda at a time designated by the Chair, either
before or during the Commission’s consideration of the item.

At every Special Meeting of the Commission, members of the public have the right to directly address the Commission on
any item listed on the agenda at a time designated by the Chair, either before or during consideration of the item.

If you challenge any of the items listed on this agenda in court, you may be limited to raising only those issues you or
someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the City of
Menlo Park at, or prior to, the public hearing.

Any writing that is distributed to a majority of the Commission by any person in connection with an agenda item is a
public record (subject to any exemption under the Public Records Act) and is available by request by emailing the city
clerk at jaherren@menlopark.gov. Persons with disabilities, who require auxiliary aids or services in attending or
participating in Commission meetings, may call the City Clerk’s Office at 650-330-6620.

Agendas are posted in accordance with Government Code §54954.2(a) or §54956. Members of the public can view
electronic agendas and staff reports by accessing the City website at www.menlopark.gov/agendas and can receive
email notification of agenda and staff report postings by subscribing to at www.menlopark.gov/subscribe. Agendas and
staff reports may also be obtained by contacting City Clerk at 650-330-6620. (Posted: 10/2/2026)




City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
Housing Commission
REGUL
AR MEETING MINUTES – DRAFT
Date: 9/
2/2026
Time: 6:30 p.m.
Location: Teleconference and
Arrillaga Recreation Center, Oak Room
700 A
lma St., Menlo Park, CA 94025
A. Call To Order
Chair Oursler called the meeting to order at 6:31 p.m.
B. Roll Call
Present: Beeli, Chapa, Dumont, Oursler, Switzer, Wong
Absent: Kranen
Staff: Management Analyst Adam Patterson, Management Analyst Arianna Milton,
Associate Planner Matthew Pruter
C. Public Comment
None.
D. Regular Business
D1. Approv
e the Housing Commission meeting minutes for August 5, 2026 (Attachment)
ACTI
ON: Motion and second (Switzer/ Chapa), to approve the Housing Commission meeting minutes for
August 5, 2026, passed 6-0-1 (Kranen absent).
D2. Review and consider recommending approval to the Planning Commission on a Below Market
Rate (BMR) Housing Agreement, consisting of one on-site BMR unit, a residential BMR in-lieu fee
and a commercial linkage BMR in-lieu fee for a proposed residential building and renovated
commercial building at 800 Oak Grove Ave. (Staff Report #26-008-HC)
Ass
ociate Planner Matthew Pruter made the presentation (Attachment).
•
A member of the public requested clarification regarding how the proposed fractional 0.5 unit is
calculated for the in-lieu fee.
The Hous
ing Commission received clarification on newly submitted project updates, including the
layout and square footage of all proposed units.
The Housing Commission discussed the affordability period of the proposed BMR unit, including
the 55-year deed restriction.
ACTI
ON: Motion and second (Oursler/ Switzer), to recommend approval to the Planning Commission on a
BMR housing agreement, consisting of one on-site BMR unit, a residential BMR in-lieu fee and a
AGENDA ITEM D-1
Page D-1.1

City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
Housing Commission Regular Meeting Minutes – DRAFT
September 2 , 2026
Page 2 of 3
c
ommercial linkage BMR in-lieu fee for a proposed residential building and renovated commercial building
at 800 Oak Grove Ave, passed 6-0-1 (Kranen absent).
D
3. Review and provide feedback on components of proposed rental assistance and legal assistance
programs. (Staff Report #26-009-HC)
M
anagement Analyst Adam Patterson made the presentation (Attachment).
The Commission provided the following feedback for consideration:
•
Inclusion of a rapid response time option for assistance within the request for proposals (RFP)
•
Creation of an internal city reference point for program referrals
•
Acceleration of the RFP process
•
Implementation of a hotline or texting component with multilingual access for potential
applicants
•
Focus proposed eviction metrics and data reporting on evaluating program overall outcomes
•
Reducing residency requirements and other program criteria to receive rental assistance
•
E
xplore a triaged response for emergency cases to help prevent those in danger of immediate
displacement
A
CTION: Motion and second (Switzer/ Dumont), to provide the above feedback on the proposed rental
assistance and legal assistance programs, passed 6-0-1 (Kranen absent).
D4
. Select commissioners for the Anti-displacement ad hoc subcommittee (Staff Report #26-010-HC)
Management Analyst Arianna Milton made the presentation (Attachment).
A
CTION: Motion and second (Oursler/ Beelie), to select Commissioner Wong for the Anti-displacement ad
hoc subcommittee, passed 6-0-1 (Kranen absent).
E. R
eports and Announcements
E1. Commissioner updates
Chair Oursler reported out on the Housing Commission annual report out to the City Council
August 25.
E2.
 Subcommittee updates
•
The Ho
using Development ad hoc subcommittee met to discuss next steps and to set up a
meeting with staff on what potential items to focus on.
•
The Community Outreach ad hoc subcommittee is looking to work on outreach for the upcoming
R
FP for the legal and rental assistance programs.
•
The Anti-displacement ad hoc subcommittee reached out to contacts and is interested in a City
Liaison for implementation.
E3. Fut
ure agenda items
N
one.
Page D-1.2




City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
Housing Commission Regular Meeting Minutes – DRAFT
September 2 , 2026
Page 3 of 3



E4. Staff updates and announcement

None.

F. Adjournment

Chair Oursler a djourned the meeting at 7:57 p.m.
 Management Analyst I Arianna Milton
Page D-1.3

800 Oak Grove Ave.
Matt Pruter, Associate Planner
1
Page D-1.4

Project location
Northwest corner of Oak
Grove Ave. and Crane St.
L- shaped
lot with bank and
surface parking lot currently
Zoned in El Camino
R
eal/Downtown Specific
Plan area
2
Page D-1.5

Project description
Renovate an existing two-
story bank into a non-medical
office with a roof deck
Remove surface-l
evel parking
lot and construct residential
building with 15 for-sale units
3
Page D-1.6

Below market rate (BMR) requirements
Residential building:
-10% of new residential units
required as BMR (1.5 units)
Commercial building:
-BMR linkage fee required,
based on the change of use
from bank to non-medical
office
4
Page D-1.7

Below market rate (BMR) proposal
Three components:
1.One on-site for-sale very low income (VLI) BMR unit in residential
building
2.Payment of residential BMR in-lieu fee for remaining 0.5-residential-
unit requirement for the project
3.Payment of a commercial linkage BMR in-lieu fee for the proposed
change of land use from bank (Group B) to non-medical office (Group
A) for an existing commercial building as part of the project
(approximately $167,977)
5
Page D-1.8

Staff recommendation
Recommend approval of BMR agreement to the Planning
Commission:
-Proposal of one on-site VLI BMR unit and payment of a residential in-
lieu fee and commercial in-lieu fee, meets the requirements of the BMR
Ordinance and BMR Guidelines
-Size and location of the two-bedroom BMR unit supports the City’s goal
of producing family-sized for-sale BMR units
-At the VLI level, the proposed BMR unit exceeds the moderate-income
level for-sale BMR requirement
6
Page D-1.9

Next steps
Housing Commission recommendation tonight (Sept. 2)
Planning Commission action on BMR agreement and
archi
tectural control permit at Sept. 14 meeting
-Planning Commission to also recommend approval for proposed
tentative map to create for-sale units on Sept. 14
City Council action on tentative map at Sept. 22 meeting
7
Page D-1.10

Thank you
8
Page D-1.11

Rental and Legal
Assistance Programs
Study Session
September 2, 2026
Page D-1.12

Recommendation
Staff recommends that the Housing Commission:
-Review and provide feedback on components of proposed rental
assistance and legal assistance programs
Page D-1.13

Background
Anti-displacement Plan (AD Plan) adopted by City Council on
May 9, 2026
-Total of seven program/ordinance recommendations
-Rental and legal assistance programs prioritized
MTC TOC grant
-City awarded $250k
-Awarded for the development of rental and legal assistance programs
-Requirements must be met to fully comply with MTC’s TOC policy
Page D-1.14

Program Research and Design
Partnering with HEART of San Mateo County
Community feedback from the AD Plan
Evaluation of previous housing assistance program
Reviewing peer jurisdictions
Interviews with service providers and experts
MTC program requirements
Page D-1.15

Previous Housing Assistance Program
Partnership with Samaritan House
-Program ran from 2019-2025
-Rental, mortgage, utility or relocation assistance
-One-time payment of up to $5,000
Program eligibility
-Household income of 150% AMI (increased from 80% after COVID)
Received $250,000 in funding
-~$185,000 used towards rental payments
Page D-1.16

Draft Rental Assistance Program Components
Page D-1.17

Draft Rental Assistance Program Requirements
Assistance payments made directly to the source
Require data gathering to evaluate program effectiveness
-Household information
-Assistance outcomes
Program outreach strategies
-City website (grant requirement)
-Multi-lingual materials (grant requirement)
-Partnering with community organizations and schools
Page D-1.18

Legal Assistance Program Research
Less local program precedence
Focus group with experts revealed:
-874 cases in SMC from July 1, 2026 – June 30, 2026
• 100 seen to final resolution by the service provider
-35 cases in Menlo Park
• 16 received legal advice
• 14 received assistance in filing paperwork
• 5 received further representation
Page D-1.19

Legal Assistance Program Considerations
Different levels of service
-Education and legal advice
-Limited-scope representation
-Full representation
Consider budget limitations
-Full representation, for example, may not be possible
Page D-1.20

Program Funding
City awarded a $250k MTC TOC grant to design and implement
rental and legal assistance programs
City to commit a minimum of $300k for each program ($600k
t
otal) over four years
-Required for full MTC TOC compliance
-Must identify a funding source
Page D-1.21

Request for Proposals (RFP)
Combined RFP
-Benefit of synergy between programs
-~80% of eviction cases related to non-payment of rent
Proposals can be for:
-One or both services
-Partnered with another provider
Provide comprehensive, coordinated service
Page D-1.22

Next Steps
Fall 2026
-Housing Commission review and recommendation
-City Council review and consideration for adoption
Release RFP
Page D-1.23

Housing Commission Feedback
Program elements to consider:
-Outreach strategies
-Data and reporting metrics
-Eligibility criteria, fund-prioritization, eligible uses
-Assistance limits (per occurrence, per person, per year)
-Legal assistance level-of-service
Page D-1.24

Thank You
Page D-1.25

Rental Assistance Programs in San Mateo County
Page D-1.26

Housing Commission Anti-
Displacement Ad Hoc
Subcommittee
September 2, 2026
Page D-1.27

Recommendation
Staff recommends that the Housing Commission:
-Select (1) one additional member for the Anti-displacement ad hoc
subcommittee
Page D-1.28

Background: Work Plan Goal #3
Page D-1.29

Current Ad Hoc Subcommittees
Page D-1.30

Recommendation
Staff recommends that the Housing Commission:
-Select (1) one additional member for the Anti-displacement ad hoc
subcommittee
Page D-1.31

Thank You
Page D-1.32

Community Development
City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
STA
FF REPORT
Housing Commission
Meeting Date: 10/7/2026
Staff Report Number:

26-011-HC
Regular Business:

Review and make a recommendation to the City
Council on establishing proposed rental
assistance and legal assistance programs

Recom
mendation
Staff recommends that the Housing Commission review and recommend approval to the City Council on
establishing proposed rental assistance and legal assistance programs.
Policy Issues
General Plan Housing Element Program H2.E (Anti-displacement Strategy) and Environmental Justice
Element Program EJ5.G ( Ensure that the City’s Anti-Displacement Strategy S upports Households and
Neighborhoods in Underserved Communities) both commit the city to the development of an Anti-
displacement Plan with a primary focus on the Belle Haven neighborhood. Environmental Justice Element
Program EJ5.H (Increase Access to Legal Counsel for Tenants Facing Eviction) commits the city to
addressing legal needs of tenants. The City Council adopted an Anti-displacement P lan (AD Plan) in May
2026 and emphasized the importance of quickly and efficiently implementing strategies to address
ongoing displacement. Two programs identified for priority implementation were a rental assistance
program and a legal assistance program. Developing and implementing these programs will help the city
maintain its commitments in both the Housing Element and the Environmental Justice Element.
Backgr
ound
Previous housing assistance program
In May 2019, the City Council approved a tenant relocation assistance program which authorized a
funding agreement with Samaritan House to administer relocation assistance payments to qualifying
households. This program received $112,000 in funding, with $100,000 for assistance payments and
$12,000 for administrative fees. In March 2020, in response to the anticipated impacts of the COVID-19
crisis, the City Council directed staff to explore amending the program to expand eligibility. In October
2021, the city set aside an additional $250,000 in American Rescue Plan (ARP) funds for this program and
expanded the eligible uses to cover COVID-related housing emergency assistance and increased the
eligible household Area Median Income (AMI) from 80% to 150% (Attachment A). Assistance was in the
form of one-time emergency payments limited to $5,000 per household. According to Samaritan House,
approximately $188,447 of the funding was used toward rental payments. Legal assistance was not
included as an eligible use of these funds, nor has the City previously offered a legal assistance program.
All funds for this program were exhausted in early 2025.
AGENDA ITEM D-2
Page D-2.1

Staff Report #: 26-011-HC

 City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
Proposed rental and legal assistance programs
On May 9, 2026, the City Council adopted the city’s first AD Plan (Attachment B). The implementation of
rental assistance and legal assistance programs were identified as top priorities to help residents remain
housed.

In 2024, to further these efforts, the city applied for the Metropolitan Transportation Commission’s (MTC)
Transit-Oriented Communities (TOC) Policy Planning Grant for housing policy development. In 2025, the
city was awarded $250,000 in grant funding toward the development and implementation of rental
assistance and legal assistance programs. The successful implementation of these programs will also
help the city achieve MTC TOC compliance, enhancing its ability to qualify for future grant funding
opportunities. To be eligible for full grant reimbursement, the city would need to establish the two
aforementioned programs by June 30, 2027, and commit a minimum of $300,000 to each program over
four years, for a total of $600,000 in program funding.


In early 2026, city staff, along with the Housing Endowment and Regional Trust of San Mateo County
(HEART), herein referred to as the Project Team, began working on the research and design of these two
programs. This included evaluation of the City’s previous housing assistance program, research on best
practices and interviews with experts and service providers.

Housing Commission feedback
On Sept. 2, 2026, the Housing Commission reviewed proposed components of the two programs and
provided feedback for staff to consider in the program design, reporting, outreach and request for
proposals (RFP) ( Attachment C) . This feedback included suggestions related to program service levels,
reporting metrics, outreach, the proposed 12-month residency requirement and limits on the frequency of
assistance. The Project Team incorporated this feedback where it was deemed most applicable; in some
cases, it is within program guidelines or criteria, or otherwise will be included in the RFP. The items are
further discussed in the Analysis section.

Analysis
Through research on best practices, peer jurisdictions, expert interviews and Housing Commission
feedback, the Project Team has developed proposed guidelines for the rental assistance program and
legal assistance program (Attachment D). The guidelines include program eligibility requirements, eligible
assistance types, maximum assistance amounts, program funding sources and program reporting metrics.
The Project Team has also proposed a post-implementation outreach plan as well as criteria to include in
the forthcoming RFP. The programs have been designed to achieve full compliance with MTC TOC policy,
including minimum annual funding of $75,000 per program for four years and targeting assistance to low-
income households (80% AMI) and below.

Rental assistance program
The Project Team has developed proposed rental assistance program guidelines, which are summarized
in Table 1.



Page D-2.2

Staff Report #: 26-011-HC

 City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
Table 1: Proposed rental assistance program framework
Program element Proposed guideline
Annual program funding amount $75,000
Program funding source BMR Housing Fund
Income eligibility 80% AMI
Geographic eligibility Incorporated Menlo Park
Tenure eligibility No minimum residency requirement
Maximum assistance per household Up to $5,000
Eligible uses Past-due rent or utilities and related late fees, current rent or utilities
Application criteria
Income verification or documented eligibility for similar public assistance
programs

The first year of this program will be pilot program, and the funding amount is based on the minimum
requirement to meet MTC TOC compliance. Consistent with similar city programs, households must be
located within incorporated Menlo Park. MTC TOC policy requires income eligibility at or below 80% of
AMI, which is consistent with other housing assistance programs, such as the original 2019 Tenant
Assistance Program and Habitat for Humanity Greater San Francisco’s home rehabilitation program. The
maximum assistance per household is $5,000, and the assistance amount will be determined at the time
of application ($5,000 is the limit, not the guaranteed amount). This amount is consistent with the previous
housing assistance program. After interviewing the city’s previous service provider and reviewing peer
jurisdiction programs, the Project Team felt this amount was still appropriate to provide meaningful
assistance as rent, utilities and living costs continue to rise. The applicant must be at least 18 years of
age, and all payments would be made directly to the source, such as a landlord or utility company.

In response to Housing Commission feedback, the Project Team removed the suggested minimum
residency requirement from 12 months to no minimum. Instead of one-time assistance, the Project Team
is proposing that households be eligible for assistance once every 12 months. This reflects the Housing
Commission’s feedback that households may encounter separate, unrelated financial setbacks that may
each require assistance, allowing them to request assistance in multiple years. However, this program is
not designed to provide long-term assistance, and the service provider should be able to refer households
to additional services as needed.

Since the Sept. 2 Housing Commission meeting, relocation expenses and emergency hotel stays have
been removed from the eligible uses of program assistance funds. The Project Team received further
guidance from MTC that a relocation assistance program would need to be designed and funded as a
separate program. The rental assistance program should be targeted at keeping folks in their homes, and
those program funds would not be eligible for relocation assistance.

Legal assistance program
The Project Team identified three potential legal assistance levels of service: legal education and advice,
limited-scope representation, and full representation. Through expert interviews, one legal service provider
reported that from July 2025 through June 2026, their organization handled 35 cases from Menlo Park
residents. Of those 35 cases, 16 received legal advice (level one), 14 received assistance filing paperwork
(level 2) and 5 received further representation (level 3). Considering this data, the proposed program
budget and Housing Commission feedback, the Project Team proposes service levels focused on
Page D-2.3

Staff Report #: 26-011-HC

 City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
prevention, reaching the greatest number of households. The proposed program will focus on:
•
 Education and legal advice, including tenant education workshops and 30-minute consultations (level
one service), and
•
 Limited-scope representation, such as assistance in filing paperwork in response to an eviction notice
to avoid a default judgment, which is when a judge rules in favor of the landlord if the tenant fails to
respond (level two service).

The Project Team has developed proposed legal assistance program guidelines, which are summarized in
Table 2.

Table 2: Proposed legal assistance program framework
Program element Proposed guideline
Annual program
funding amount
$75,000
Program funding
source
BMR Housing Fund
Income eligibility 80% AMI
Geographic eligibility Incorporated Menlo Park
Tenure eligibility No minimum residency requirement
Levels of service
Level 1 (education sessions, 30-minute consultations); level 2 (limited-scope assistance,
such as eviction paperwork)
Application criteria
Income verification (self-certify for level 1, full application for level 2), eligibility for other
public assistance programs

The Project Team is not proposing full representation at this time, which may include a right-to-counsel
(level three service). However, staff will monitor the needs of the community through data and reporting
from the service provider.

Unless otherwise noted, eligibility requirements for the program will mirror those of the rental assistance
program. Understanding that time is of the essence in potential eviction cases, the Project Team is
proposing that assistance-seekers have the ability to self-certify their income eligibility for level one service
to expedite access. To receive assistance beyond that, they must submit a full application to verify
program income eligibility.

Program reporting requirements
As these are intended to be pilot programs, the Project Team will require reporting metrics that will help
staff evaluate program effectiveness and inform future improvements. These metrics will include the
following:
•
 Household information, including household size, income, demographic data, special circumstance
households (minors, seniors, persons with disabilities).
•
 Time to receive service.
•
 Amount of assistance provided.
•
 Reason for needing assistance.
•
 Whether a household received prior assistance.
•
 Housing type (market and below market rate).
•
 Program effectiveness follow-up to understand future housing stability
Page D-2.4

Staff Report #: 26-011-HC

 City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
•
 Reporting metrics designed to evaluate program outcomes, including the total number of inquiries,
service provided and the results of all cases (to the extent possible). This would help staff understand
not just the number of households served or that funds were exhausted, but also the needs of the
community and whether additional funding or program changes are needed.
•
 Geographic location within the city.

This data collection will be designed to help inform the city about program effectiveness and be used to
inform future program adjustments. Program data should be made available to city staff upon request, with
a minimum requirement of quarterly program updates.

Combined RFP
The goal of the RFP is to identify qualified and experienced service providers that are equipped to provide
these types of crucial services to the Menlo Park community. Based on research and supported by
Housing Commission feedback, staff will issue a combined RFP, allowing service providers to submit
proposals for one or both services. To not exclude any interested providers, the RFP notice will be clear
that service providers may submit for any or all services and also partner with another provider to provide
both services. One legal service provider estimated that approximately 80% of eviction cases are due to
non-payment of rent, and the Project Team believes this approach will help provide coordinated, agile and
comprehensive assistance to households in need of one or both services.

The RFP will also ask that interested service providers respond to program suggestions from the Housing
Commission, including rapid responses and triage of cases, a dedicated hotline, a texting option, a
required response time for inquiries and weekend service availability.

Post-implementation outreach
The Project Team proposes the following outreach activities to help raise awareness of the program for
Menlo Park residents:
•
 Dedicated program pages on the city website.
•
 City digest and social media.
•
 Multi-lingual outreach materials.
•
 Distribution of outreach materials to local community-based organizations, schools, property.
managers, and other assistance providers in the community.
•
 Presence at local resource fairs and events.
•
 Distribution of outreach materials and program awareness to other city staff to respond to inquiries.

Next Steps
The Housing Commission’s recommendation, a draft RFP and draft program guidelines, will be presented
to the City Council for consideration for adoption on October 27. If approved, staff will issue the final RFP
shortly after. If approved and implemented, staff expects that the Housing Commission and anti -
displacement ad hoc subcommittee will have an ongoing role in reviewing program data to identify if any
adjustments are needed to make the program more effective.


Impact on City Resources
The cost of designing and implementing these programs is completely covered by the MTC TOC grant if
Page D-2.5

Staff Report #: 26-011-HC

 City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
they meet the TOC requirements. The cost of operating these two programs is a minimum of $600,000
($300,000 each) total over four years to achieve MTC TOC compliance. Funding for these programs
would be from the Below Market Rate Housing Fund (Fund 222), and the minimum funding amounts have
been identified in that fund’s budget. $150,000 has been included in the adopted FY 2026-27 budget for
the first year of these programs.

Environmental Review
This action is not a project within the meaning of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
Guidelines Sections 15378 and 15061(b)(3) as it will not result in any direct or indirect physical change in
the environment.

Public Notice
Public notification was achieved by posting the agenda, with the agenda items being listed, at least 72
hours prior to the meeting.

Attachments
A. Hyperlink – Oct. 26, 2021, City Council Staff Report #21-208-CC:
https://www.menlopark.gov/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/agendas-and-minutes/city-council/2021-
meetings/agendas/20211026-city-council-agenda-packet.pdf
B. Hyperlink – May 19 City Council Staff Report #26-089-CC:
https://www.menlopark.gov/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/agendas-and-minutes/city-council/2026-
meetings/20260519/k1-20260519-cc-anti-displacement-plan.pdf
C. Hyperlink – Sept. 7 Housing Commission Staff Report #26-009-HC:
https://www.menlopark.gov/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/agendas-and-minutes/housing-
commission/2026-meetings/agendas/20260902-housing-commission-regular-meeting-agenda-
packet.pdf
D. Draft Program Guidelines

Report prepared by:
Adam Patterson, Management Analyst II

Report reviewed by:
Deanna Chow, Community Development Director
Page D-2.6

Rental Assistance Draft Program Guidelines
Program Purpose
The City of Menlo Park, through its adopted Anti-displacement Plan, identified several
strategies to prevent displacement in the community. A rental assistance program was
identified as a priority for implementation, to help alleviate the pressures of rising rent,
utilities and living costs.
Program Goals
The primary intent of this program is to provide emergency rental assistance to households
experiencing acute financial hardship. The program is designed to stabilize households, not
to provide ongoing, long-term assistance.
Program Eligibility
To be eligible to receive assistance, applicants must meet the following criteria:
• Income eligibility:
o At or below 80% of Area Median Income (AMI) for San Mateo County, as
adjusted from time to time
• Residency: Current resident with a residential lease within incorporated Menlo Park
• Age: Applicant must be 18 years of age or older
Eligible uses of rental assistance funds:
• Rent payment
• Utility bills
• Any late fees associated with overdue rent or utility bills
Arrears and/or a late notice is not required to receive assistance, but applicants must
demonstrate financial hardship, which should be described with supporting
documentation to determine program eligibility.
Financial Assistance
Eligible households may receive assistance of up to $5,000 once per fiscal year. Funds will
be disbursed on a first-come, first-served basis, and the assistance amount will be
determined at the time of application. Once an eligible household receives assistance in
any amount up to the $5,000 limit, they will not be eligible again for 12 months. Payments
will be made directly to the source (such as landlord or utility provider), although
exceptions may be made on a case-by-case basis.
Page D-2.7

Program Funding
Program funding will be allocated from the city’s Below Market Rate Housing Fund and the
funding amount will be determined on a yearly basis as part of the budgeting process as
funds allow. The goal is to provide a minimum of $300,000 of program funding over four
years with the initial first year pilot program funded at $75,000.
Program Reporting
The program administrator shall track and report on the program status based on metrics
outlined in the funding agreement. Reporting metrics should include:
•

Household information, including household size, income, demographic data, special
circumstance households (minors, seniors, persons with disabilities).
•

Time to receive service.
•

Amount of assistance provided.
•

Reason for needing assistance.
•

Whether a household received prior assistance.
•

Housing type (market and below market rate).
•

Program effectiveness follow-up to understand future housing stability
•

Reporting metrics designed to evaluate program outcomes, including the total number
of inquiries, service provided and the results of all cases (to the extent possible)
•

Geographic location within the city.

Program Administration
The City will work with a third party to administer the program following selection through
an request for proposal process. The program administrator will be responsible for
implementing the program and shall track and report on the program status based on
metrics outlined in the funding agreement.









Page D-2.8

Legal Assistance Draft Program Guidelines
Program Purpose
The City of Menlo Park, through its adopted Anti-displacement Plan, identified several
strategies to prevent displacement in the community. A legal assistance program was
identified as a priority for implementation to provide tenants with the legal resources to
help prevent displacement through eviction.
Program Goals
The primary intent of this program is to provide legal education, awareness and limited-
scope representation, such as guidance through an eviction notice. The program is
designed to complement the rental assistance program, providing those at-risk of eviction
with the resources necessary to remain housed.
Program Eligibility
To receive Level One services, the applicant may self-certify income eligibility but must
meet all other eligibility criteria. However, applicant information will still be collected for
evaluation and reporting services.
To be eligible to receive Level Two services, applicants must meet the following criteria:
• Income eligibility:
o At or below 80% of Area Median Income (AMI) for San Mateo County, as
adjusted from time to time
• Residency: Current resident with a residential lease within incorporated Menlo Park
• Age: Applicant must be 18 years of age or older
Program Assistance
Services will include:
• Level One services – legal assistance educational workshops and 30-minute 1:1
consultations.
Level Two services – limited-scope representation, which includes responding to an
eviction notice. This may include hands-on case management and filing the necessary
paperwork to avoid a default judgement.
Program Reporting
The program administrator shall track and report on the program status based on metrics
outlined in the funding agreement. Reporting metrics should include:
Page D-2.9

•

Household information, including household size, income, demographic data, special
circumstance households (minors, seniors, persons with disabilities).
•

Time to receive service.
•

Type of assistance provided.
•

Reason for needing assistance.
•

Whether a household received prior assistance.
•

Housing type (market and below market rate).
•

Program effectiveness follow-up to understand future housing stability
•

Reporting metrics designed to evaluate program outcomes, including the total number
of inquiries, service provided and the results of all cases (to the extent possible).
•

Geographic location within the city.

Program Funding
The city will provide a minimum of $300,000 of program funding over four years. Program
funding will be allocated from the city’s Below Market Rate Housing Fund.
Eligible households may receive assistance on an as-needed basis. However, program
funding is limited and households experiencing ongoing or more significant legal issues
may need to seek assistance outside of the scope of this program.
Program Administration
The City will work with a third party to administer the program following selection through
an request for proposal process. The program administrator will be responsible for
implementing the program and shall track and report on the program status based on
metrics outlined in the funding agreement.

Page D-2.10

Community Development
City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
STAFF REPO
RT
Housing Commission
Meeting Date: 10/07/2026
Staff Report Number: 26-012-HC
Regular Business:

Review and provide feedback on the draft 2026-
2027 Below Market Rate Housing Fund Notice of
Funding Availability

Recommendation
S
taff requests that the Housing Commission review and provide feedback on the proposed 2026-2027
draft Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) (Attachment A).
Policy Issues
Addressing affordable housing needs continues to be one of the City Council’s top priorities. The City of
Menlo Park’s 2023-2031 Housing Element Program H1.I (Utilize the City’s Below Market Rate (BMR)
Housing Fund) requires the City to administer and release a NOFA no less than every two years. The
release of the NOFA also supports Housing Element Program H1.E (Work with Non-Profits on Housing),
which allows organizations to apply for funding to promote the preservation and production of affordable
housing.
Background
The goal of
 the City’s NOFA is to support the preservation and production of affordable housing in the City
to meet the City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) and other Housing Element program goals.
The funding is intended to fill the financing gap between the project total development costs and other
available funding sources. A local award of funds can also make projects more attractive when competing
for other additional funding sources. With local funding, applicants may be able to more quickly reach their
financing goal to move a proposed development project forward.
The City las
t issued a NOFA in December 2022 and has also reviewed off -cycle requests for funding. In
the last several years, the City Council has authorized the use of BMR Housing Funds to support the
following projects:
•
Rebuilding Together (RTP) received $180,000 to support affordable housing preservation through
rehabilitation of existing homes.
•
Habitat for Humanity Greater San Francisco (HHGSF) received $1.2 million for the preservation of
existing housing in Menlo Park, with a prioritization for the Belle Haven neighborhood. Making repairs
and/or upgrades to existing homes helps preserve existing housing stock, maintain long term
affordability and keep residents in place.
•
Alliant Communities received a $1 million loan to develop 88 BMR units at 320 Sheridan Dr. to support
housing for teachers.
AGENDA ITEM D-3
Page D-3.1

Staff Report #: 26-012-HC
City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
•
HHGSF received $3.6 million for the acquisition of land and predevelopment costs to develop eight
low-income for-sale h omes at 335 Pierce Rd.
A
nalysis
The 2026-2027 draft NOFA maintains a similar review process and application submittal requirements
compared to the most recent City NOFA. The notable differences between the two are within the
background and project priorities sections. The proposed updates to the NOFA include adding a
preference for the preservation or rehabilitation of existing affordable housing, in particular, multi-family
projects. This could apply to both existing deed-restricted and/or naturally occurring affordable housing.
The update is in response to Recommendation # 5 (Home Preservation Program) of the City of Menlo
Park Anti-displacement Plan adopted in May 2026. Project proposals that also focus on providing
extremely low-income units and units set aside for special needs populations will receive additional
consideration. By encouraging these types of proposals, the City is working towards meeting the goals of
both the Anti-Displacement Plan and Housing Element.
The N
OFA announcement and application are attached. City staff will release the notification to a list of
non-profit agencies. The agencies must r egister and submit proposals electronically through PlanetBids.
The H
ousing Commission is requested to provide feedback on the draft 2026-2027 NOFA. This feedback
could include suggestions on the tentative release schedule, funding allocation and/or any thoughts that
the Housing Commission would like staff to consider.
The t
entative schedule for this NOFA is as follows and considers the timing of the County of San Mateo’s
Department of Housing FY 2027-28 Winter NOFA, expected to be released on December 1, and
potentially the San Mateo County Affordable Housing Fund (AHF) NOFA next spring if funding is available.
For the latter NOFA, a third-party funding commitment has been required as part of the application. The
City’s NOFA schedule, therefore, would allow the City to make a commitment of funds to strengthen
applications to the County’s NOFA.
A
pplication release
City Council informational item: Tuesday, Oct. 13, 2026
NOFA release: Thursday, Oct. 15, 2026
NOFA questions due: 5 p.m., Friday, Nov. 6, 2026
Responses to questions provided by: Thursday, Nov 12, 2026
NOFA applications due: 5 p.m., Friday, Nov. 20, 2026
Housing Commission presentations: TBD, Winter 2027
Housing Commission recommendations: TBD, Winter/Spring 2027
City Council consideration: TBD, Spring 2027
Next Steps
After receiving feedback from the Housing Commission and making any final adjustments, the draft NOFA
will be shared with the City Council as an informational item on Tuesday, Oct. 13. The NOFA will then be
released no later than Friday, Oct 16, with applications due in November and recommendations to follow
in Winter/Spring 2027. The City Council reserves the right to decide the number of applicants that will be
Page D-3.2

Staff Report #: 26-012-HC

 City of Menlo Park 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025 tel 650-330-6600 www.menlopark.gov
awarded funding and how much funding they may receive during this NOFA cycle. The Housing
Commission would provide funding recommendations with the City Council as the final decision-making
body.

Impact on City Resources
There is no impact on the City’s General Fund. Awards from the 2026-2027 NOFA process will be funded
through the Below Market Rate Housing Fund.

Environmental Review
No environmental review is required for this funding process, although projects that may be awarded
funding may be subject to California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review requirements.

Public Notice
Public notification was achieved by posting the agenda, with the agenda items being listed, at least 72
hours prior to the meeting. Additionally, staff will post the NOFA announcement in the City Digest and on
the City’s website.

Attachments
A. Draft 2026-27 NOFA

Report prepared by:
Arianna Milton, Management Analyst I

Report reviewed by:
Adam Patterson, Management Analyst II
Deanna Chow, Community Development Director
Page D-3.3

NOTICE OF FUNDING AVAILABILITY (NOFA)
Community Development – Housing Division
701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA 94025
tel 650-330-6732


Background
The City of Menlo Park announces the availability of funds for affordable housing projects in Menlo Park and seeks
responsive proposals. Approximately $4 million in below market rate (BMR) housing funds are available under this
NOFA to support the preservation and production of permanent affordable housing. The funding is intended to fill the
financing gap between the projected total development costs and other available funding sources. The City is looking to
assist a variety of organizations and reserves the right to determine the amount of funding distributed to each awarded
applicant. The City also reserves the right to not fund any proposals during this NOFA cycle.
Qualified developers of affordable housing who meet the NOFA qualifications are encouraged to submit proposals. All
proposals must be received no later than 5 p.m., Nov. 20, 2026. Interested parties may submit as an individual entity
and/or may collaborate with other entities, so long as the collective group meets the NOFA requirements. Funding will
be awarded by the City Council on a competitive basis to those projects that are most successful in addressing the
City’s affordable housing needs.

The City is seeking proposals demonstrating the following: an understanding of the community; the unique attributes
and opportunities of the neighborhood where the project will be located; successful experience in developing and
managing affordable housing; ability to deliver the project in a timely manner, contributes to meeting the City’s overall
housing goals, and a commitment to an inclusive and informative public engagement process.

Applicants must have successfully completed prior affordable housing projects. Joint venture partnerships are allowed
assuming at least one member of the partnership meets the minimum experience requirement.
Eligible projects include the preservation of existing affordable housing and the acquisition or new construction of
permanent affordable rental or ownership housing for extremely low, very low and low-income households. Projects
that include extremely low-income units, units set aside for special needs populations and/or a focus on the
preservation of existing housing may be viewed with additional desirability in the review process. Proposals from
organizations that produce affordable housing through the administration of housing programs will also be considered,
although BMR housing funds will be primarily limited to direct housing production (e.g., first-time homebuyer program,
accessory dwelling unit loan program, acquisition and/or preservation of existing housing, etc.) The development of
emergency shelters for the homeless and transitional housing is not eligible because they do not result in permanent
affordable housing. Mixed-income projects containing both affordable and market-rate rental and ownership units are
eligible, with only the affordable housing portion of the project eligible for assistance under this NOFA.

The City will evaluate proposals based on City Council-adopted housing goals and priorities. All proposals will be
reviewed for consistency with the Housing Element and the City’s General Plan. There will not be a point system
applied to these goals and priorities.
Funding priority will be given to applications received by the due date in this NOFA. If there are BMR funds available after
the NOFA process, these funds will be available on an over-the-counter basis, subject to Housing Commission review
and City Council approval.
Request for proposals schedule
Application release
NOFA release: Thursday, Oct. 15, 2026
NOFA questions due: 5 p.m., Friday, Nov. 6, 2026
Responses to questions provided by: Thursday, Nov. 12, 2026
NOFA applications due: 5 p.m., Friday, Nov. 20, 2026
Housing Commission presentations: TBD, Winter 2027
Housing Commission recommendations TBD, Winter/Spring 2027
City Council considerations: TBD, Spring 2027

Page D-3.4

Project priorities
To be considered for funding under this NOFA, the project should attempt to meet the following project priorities:
• Housing units will remain affordable through deed restrictions for at least 55 years.
• The project is consistent with the goals and objectives of the City’s Housing Element policies and programs and
General Plan.
• The project has reasonable costs, the ability to compete well in securing competitive fund sources and is
soundly underwritten.
• The project will allow the City to spend housing funds expeditiously, projects should be “ready to go.”
• The project site allows a development to achieve maximum density and is consistent with the applicable zoning.
• The project provides dual benefits by preserving/developing affordable housing and creating a
substantial improvement to an underutilized site.
• The building incorporates green building practices and materials.
• The project incorporates appropriate community spaces, amenities, and services for the target population.
• The project site is within walking distance of transit, services, and amenities and is convenient for
the target population.
• The project will implement a Local Hire program for Menlo Park residents (via construction and/or
operations) when applicable.
• The development team has demonstrated experience with successful affordable housing projects and the capacity
to work cooperatively with communities in the design and development of projects.
• The project provides housing targeting extremely low, very low and low-income households and/or units set aside for
special needs populations needing on-site supportive services
• The project is in central or west Menlo Park.
• The project contains larger units (2+ bedroom units and larger) and generally targets families.
• The project’s management plan promotes a healthy living environment for tenants.
Review process
Application review
Staff will review all proposals to verify applicant eligibility. Proposals from developers that do not meet the City’s
minimum required experience will not be considered. Incomplete proposals will not be considered.
Please note that the City aims to target BMR funds toward projects serving households at the lowest affordability levels.
The City also intends to maximize the impact of its investment by awarding funds to projects requesting reasonable
levels of subsidy, leveraged by other fund sources. So, in instances where there are multiple projects applying for funds,
affordability targeting and subsidy level per unit will be considered.
Environmental review and assessment
Before the final funding commitment, projects must be assessed in accordance with the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA). If Federal funding is involved, the project must also be assessed in accordance with the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
Communications and questions
The City of Menlo Park reserves the right to request additional information from applicants, reject any and all submittals,
waive any irregularities in the submittal requirements or cancel, suspend or amend the provisions of this NOFA. If such
an action occurs, the City will notify all interested parties in advance.
Should discrepancies or omissions be found in this RFP or should there be a need to clarify this RFP, questions or
comments regarding this RFP must be put in writing and received by the City no later than 5 p.m., Friday, Nov. 6,
2026. Written questions may be submitted electronically through the city bid portal at menlopark.gov/planetbids or via
email to Management Analyst Arianna Milton at anmilton@menlopark.gov.
Responses from the City will be communicated in writing to all recipients of this RFP. All addenda shall become part
of this RFP. The City shall not be responsible for nor be bound by any oral instructions, interpretations or
explanations issued by the City.

Page D-3.5

Application submittal requirements
The NOFA application is completed entirely online and will close at 5 p.m., Nov. 20, 2026. Follow the steps below to
create your vendor record, access all relevant NOFA information, and create and submit your online application and
any attachments.
Step 1. Create a new vendor record, or access your existing record on PlanetBids, to initiate your NOFA application.
• Applicants who do not have a username password for the PlanetBids website may register for free by selecting
“New Vendor Registration” at menlopark.gov/planetbids.

Step 2. Access the following NOFA information in PlanetBids:
The NOFA solicitation packet with instructions for accessing, completing and submitting the online NOFA application.
• General NOFA information, including updates and NOFA closing timelines; and
• All addenda (question-and-answer responses), including responses to requests for clarification or interpretation
during the application period, which are regularly updated until the NOFA closes. Applicants should regularly visit
the Vendor Portal to view updates.

Applications must be submitted by 5 p.m., Friday, Nov. 20, 2026, using the online vendor portal. Please note - under the
California Public Records Act, all documents submitted as part of this application are considered public records and will
be made available to the public upon request.

Page D-3.6

Rev 20260928

2026-27 NOTICE OF FUNDING AVAILABILITY APPLICATION
Community Development – Housing
Division 701 Laurel St., Menlo Park, CA
94025
tel 650-330-6702

Project applicant
Please provide a cover letter in addition to a complete application. This should include a brief summary of the proposed
project, discuss your agency’s qualifications and why your proposal should be selected for funding.
Organization/Agency:
Primary contact person:
Phone: Email:
Address: City: State: Zip:
1. What is the role of the applicant in the project (check all that apply):
 Ownership entity
 Managing partner or managing member
 Sponsoring organization
 Developer
 Other (describe):
2. Applicant legal status:
 General partnership
 Joint venture
 Limited partnership corporation
 Nonprofit organization
 Other (please specify):
3. Organization status:
 Currently exists
 To be formed (estimated date):

4. Name(s) of individuals who are/will be general partner(s) or principal owner(s):
If the applicant is a joint venture, a joint venture agreement is required that clearly describes the roles and
responsibilities of each partner, who is the lead partner or if the responsibilities are approximately equally split between
the partners.
Project detail
Project name:
Project address: City: State: Zip:
Assessor’s parcel number:
Project type (check all that apply):
 Families
 Seniors
 Special needs
 Other (please describe):
Project activity (check all that apply):
 Acquisition of units
 Rehabilitation
 New construction
 Preservation
 Mixed-income
 Mixed-use
 Other (please specify):

Page D-3.7

Rev 20260928

Land area: Number of residential buildings:
Number of units: Residential total floor area:
Number of stories: Number of elevators:
Number of community rooms: Community room(s) total floor area:
Commercial/office uses (please specify):


Commercial total floor area: Office total floor area:
Other uses (please specify):


Total parking spaces: Parking type(s):
Residential parking spaces: Residential parking ratio:
Guest parking spaces:
Commercial parking spaces: Commercial parking ratio:
Office parking spaces: Office parking ratio:
Income categories
City BMR funds may only fund units serving extremely low, very low or low income households at or below 80% of the
area median income (AMI). Provide the number of units by unit type and household income.
Category Number of units Percentage of units
 Studio 1 bd 2 bd 3 bd 4 bd Studio 1 bd 2 bd 3 bd 4 bd
0 to 30% AMI – Extremely low
31 to 50% AMI – Very low
51 to 80% AMI – Low
81 to 120% AMI – Moderate
Unrestricted
Total
Inclusionary zoning requirement
What is the project's inclusionary zoning requirement by unit type and income category?
Category Number of units Percentage of units
 Studio 1 bd 2 bd 3 bd 4 bd Studio 1 bd 2 bd 3 bd 4 bd
Inclusionary unit obligation
Unit amenities
Provide a brief list of unit amenities (e.g., air conditioning, laundry in unit, balconies, etc.):
Page D-3.8

Rev 20260928

Project narrative (please attach any additional sheets to respond to the questions)
1. Project description: Provide a brief narrative summary of the proposed project including location, project type (e.g.,
new versus rehab), target population and any unique project characteristics.
2. Project design: Provide a description of the project’s architectural and site plan concepts and how these concepts
address the opportunities and limitations of the site and location.
3. Green building features: Describe the green building features that will be incorporated into the project.
4. On-site amenities: Describe any on-site amenities including any project characteristics that address the special
needs of the population you intend to serve.
5. Neighborhood off-site amenities: Describe the property location, neighborhood transportation options, and local
services and amenities that are within 1/4 mile and 1/2 mile of the site.
6. Potential development obstacles: Are there any known issues or circumstances that may delay or create
challenges for the project? If yes, list issues below including an outline of steps that will be taken and the time
needed to resolve these issues.
Page D-3.9

Rev 20260928

7. Development schedule: Include a detailed project schedule identifying all major milestones. The schedule must
include major milestones for the development approval process such as purchase of the property, community
outreach process, financing, applications, approvals, closings, project construction and lease up. Projects with
schedules projecting completion within three years will be given priority.
8. Community outreach plan: Include the plan for conducting community outreach to neighbors of the proposed
development and interested community groups. The outreach plan should describe how the developer intends to
build support for the project and address community concerns. The outreach plan should also discuss any
anticipated community concerns and how they would be handled.
Site information (please attach any additional sheets to respond to the questions)
Site control may be required. Please include the site control document as well as documentation demonstrating that
the entity that has site control is the same entity applying for funds.
What type of site control does the applicant currently hold?
Will site acquisition be a purchase or long-term lease?
What is the purchase price of the land? For proposed leaseholds, indicate the amount of the annual lease payment and
the basis for determining that amount:
What is the current County-assessed value of the site?
Who is the current property owner and what is their address and contact information?
Total square footage of site:
Existing uses on the site and the approximate square footage of all structures:
Planned use of on-site existing structures:
 Demolish
 Rehabilitate
 Other (describe):
Provide the square footage, date built and number of stories for each on-site building to be retained as part of this project:

Page D-3.10

Rev 20260928

Provide a brief description of the condition of any buildings to be rehabilitated:
Please describe any unique site features (heritage trees, parcel shape, topography, etc.)
 Please describe any potential site constraints (e.g. high noise levels, ingress/egress issues, etc).
Environmental review
Is the site in a floodplain?  Yes  No
List any maps referenced:
Please describe the site’s environmental considerations (e.g. hazardous materials, sensitive habitat, historic resources,
etc.):
Would the project be exempt under CEQA? If yes, please identify the exemption.
Describe adjoining land uses
West:
East:
North:
South:
Zoning
What is the current zoning of the project site?
Page D-3.11

Rev 20260928

Is the proposed project consistent with the existing zoning of the site?  Yes  No
Explain:
Indicate any discretionary review permits required for the project (e.g., use permit, design review, rezoning, subdivision,
heritage tree removal, etc.)
If rezoning is required identify the requested zoning district for the project:
Community priorities (please attach any additional sheets to respond to the questions )
Explain how this project meets the objectives of the project priorities identified in this NOFA and the specific goals and
objectives of the City’s Housing Element, General Plan, and/or other City Council policies/goals:
Project funding (please attach any additional sheets to respond to the questions)
City funds requested: Funds per assisted unit:
Total project cost: Cost per assisted unit:
How will the requested City funding be used?
Describe the sources of funds for the proposed project. Assess the chances of the project securing required funding
and steps that will be taken to make the project competitive. Please provide detailed financial information for the
proposed project including permanent and construction fund sources, detailed permanent development budget, unit
affordability mix/rent schedule, operating budget and 30-year cash flow. If the project will use tax credits, please provide
the tax credit calculations.
OPTIONAL: What is the self-scored 9% tax credit tiebreaker score for the project? (Please note that you may be
required to provide this during the application review)

Page D-3.12

Rev 20260928

Developer experience (please attach any additional sheets to respond to the questions)
Applicants may be nonprofit or for-profit affordable housing developers or owners who have affordable housing
experience in the nine Bay Area counties. Applicants must demonstrate a successful track record of implementing a
project similar to the one proposed and have at least two years of ownership of at least two affordable, deed-restricted
housing projects within the nine-county Bay Area in which 100% of the units are targeted to those at or below 80%
AMI. Joint venture partnerships are allowed assuming at least one member of the partnership meets the minimum
experience requirement. Previous development/ownership experience must include projects that contain at least 10
units. Projects with market rate/mixed-income units that satisfy these requirements are allowed.
Years of experience:
Number of projects:
Number of projects in San Mateo County:
Average size of projects:
Number of units placed in service:
Please describe two projects completed in the last 10 years that are similar to the proposed project and provide
photographs of each project:
Project 1 – Project name:
Location:
Number of units:
Type of development (senior, family, etc.):
Name of project manager:
Number of stories:
Unit types (studio, 1 bedroom, etc.):
Type of construction:
Project amenities:
Entitlement date:
Occupancy date:
Funding sources:
Project 2 – Project name:
Location:
Number of units:
Type of development (senior, family, etc.):
Name of project manager:
Number of stories:
Unit types (studio, 1 bedroom, etc.):
Type of construction:
Project amenities:
Entitlement date:
Occupancy date:
Funding sources:
Page D-3.13

Rev 20260928

Personnel
List the names of key members of the applicant’s development team, their titles, responsibilities and years of experience
in affordable housing. Additionally, please include the following:
• Attach resumes for the owner/developer and property manager. The resume should include a list of affordable
housing projects owned/developed and managed. Include the following: name of project, address, number of
units, target population, project PIS date and years under ownership/management.
• Provide resumes and project experience for all key staff working on the project including but not limited to:
principals, project manager, project staff and financial officer. Indicate the level of experience of the project
manager with projects similar to the proposal. Provide at least three references from City or County staff involved
with projects completed in the last six years.

Project Staff

Name
Role in proposed
project
Years of housing
development
experience
Years with this
developer
Project manager

Director of
real estate
development

Executive director

Chief financial officer

Other

Other

Indicate which of the following development team members have been selected and identify them if different from
applicant.
Developer: Architect(s):
Engineer(s): General contractor:
Attorney(s) and/or tax professionals:
Board of directors; city of residence:
Property management agent:
Financial and other consultant(s):
Investor(s):
List all other participants and affiliates (people, businesses and organizations) proposing to participate in the project.
Name Address





Page D-3.14

Rev 20260928

Describe how the property will be managed including the number of staff, locations and management office hours.
If the project will be managed by an agency other than the project applicant describe the project applicant’s role in the
ongoing management of the project and resolution of management issues.
Applicant certification
I, as the applicant representing this organization, certify that the information submitted in this application and all
supporting materials is true, accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge. I acknowledge that if facts and/or
information herein are found to be misrepresented it shall constitute grounds for disqualification of my proposal. I
further certify that the following statements are true except if I have indicated otherwise on this certification:
 The organization has not sold any of the projects listed on the 10 Year Projects list.
 No mortgage on a project listed by this organization has ever been in default.
 This organization has not experienced defaults or noncompliance under any contract or regulatory agreement nor
issued IRS Form 8823 on any Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) project on the 10 Year Projects list
 To the best of my knowledge there are no unresolved findings raised as a result of Agencies’ audits, management
reviews or other investigations concerning this organization nor its projects for the past 10 years
 This organization has not been suspended, been barred or otherwise restricted by any state agency from
participating in the LIHTC program or other affordable housing programs
 This organization has not failed to use state funds or LIHTC allocated to me in any state

I have checked each checkbox above and have attached a true and accurate signed statement, if applicable; to
explain the facts and circumstances that I think help to qualify me as a responsible principal for participation in this
NOFA.



Signature Date


Printed name Title

This application and all supporting material are regarded as public records under the California Public Records
Act.
Page D-3.15

Housing Commission work plan
Community Development Department
701 Laurel Street, Menlo Park CA 94025
 City Council approval date: 9/15/2026
Work plan goals
1.Housing Development: Encourage development of affordable housing, aiming to exceed the
targeted unit yield outlined in the 2023-2031 Housing Element. Support existing housing
commitments. Review Below Market Rate (BMR) policy and make recommendations to support
future housing stock.
Beneficial impacts: Improve and maintain housing stock. Ensure housing policies and programs are
effective.
Timeline: Ongoing.
Measure of success: Issuance of recommendations for housing development throughout the c ity.
Hig
h priority:
•Support Housing on downtown parking lots.
•Review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission and/or City Council on BMR
policy/agreements.
Low priority:
•Encourage developers to exceed the targeted unit yields as outlined in the Housing Element.
Related efforts:
•Housing Element Program H4.G.
•City Council p riorities identified for fiscal year (FY) 2026-27 (housing and downtown vibrancy).
•Pursue affordable housing development on City-owned downtown parking lots.
•Finalize Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) funding agreement for 123 Independence Dr. for BMR
funds.
•Initiate second phase of BMR Guidelines update.
•Process Parkline master plan.
2.Community Engagement: Provide public resources and communication regarding tenant rights
and protections and available legal resources. Increase quantity and diversity of community
participation, including multi-lingual input.
Beneficial impacts: Increased participation to better inform housing policy and community attitudes about
housing.
T
imeline: Goal 2 to begin in the first quarter of FY 2026-27 and continue throughout the FY 2026-27.
Measure of success: Hold one (1) community event in the City and two (2) Housing Commission meetings
at Belle Haven Community Campus (BHCC). City website with links to information resources.
Hig
h priority:
•Hold one (1) community event in the City
•Hold two (2) Housing Commission Meetings at BHCC
Low p
riority:
•Hold additional community meetings and events.
•Create community resources (See g oal no. 3).
Related efforts:
•City Council priorities identified for FY 2026-27 (housing).
AGENDA ITEM E-5
Page E-5.1

•Enhance information sharing about current development projects and regulations.
3.Anti-Displacement: Review and recommend anti-displacement policy and programs. Develop
resources and information to support current residents. Aim to better monitor and quantify the causes
and impacts of displacement.
Beneficial impacts: Reduced displacement, program and policy recommendations. Communicate the
impacts of displacement.
Timeline: Work with staff to propose specific code language for City Council adoption by the end of FY
2026-27.
M
easure of success: Issuance of recommendations on anti-displacement policy.
Hig
h priority:
•Review and support staff anti-displacement study.
•Review and recommend policies to quantify displacement.
Low priority:
•Create a collection of personal accounts to demonstrate the impacts of displacement.
Related efforts:
•Housing Element Program H2.E.
•City Council p riorities identified for FY 2026-27 (housing).
•Develop and implement policies/programs identified in the City Council adopted Anti -displacement Plan.
•Implement homeownership preservation program with Habitat for Humanity.
Work plan history
Action Date Notes
Work plan recommended to HC June 3, 2026 Commission approved
Work plan recommended to City
Council
 September 15, 2026
Page E-5.2
